---
student_name: [Paul Czech]
topic: [Public Policies in Support of Digital Commons]
---
Today, as digital commons are widely used by individuals, businesses, and public institutions globally, governments and supranational organizations like the EU have actively supported their development through policies from the start (Digital Assembly, 2022). 
Several EU member states have initiated national projects such as for example France’s Free Software and Digital Commons Action Plan (2021), Germany’s Sovereign Tech Fund (2022) or Italy’s Developers Italia (2017). 
These national projects were designed to promote the adoption and expansion of digital commons within public administrations by facilitating expertise sharing through comprehensive listings of digital commons, encouraging their creation, and providing funding to promising digital commons and their developers (Digital Assembly, 2022). 
However, in my opinion, these policies are effective only if necessary prerequisites are in place. For example, collaboration tools like shared code repositories and reliable communication platforms (e.g., video or audio conferencing) must provide a user-friendly workspace to efficiently support cooperative work on digital commons. In addition, allocated funds must be properly utilized, as a significant issue, such as in Germany, is the investment backlog caused by unspent resources. It is equally important that the funding is directly targeted to software developers whose digital commons demonstrate potential to avoid wasting resources in the wrong places. However, the problem with national initiatives is that they are limited to a single country, which prevents the pooling of resources, a lack of standardization and leads to missed opportunities for knowledge sharing and cost advantages that could be achieved through cross-border communities. 
Beyond regularly expressing support for digital commons through political statements and declarations, the EU has, in addition to national initiatives by member states, implemented various strategic policy frameworks such as the EU Digital Strategy, the Open Source Software Strategy 2020-2023 or the Digital Decade 2030 to discover potential synergies between member states, promote the sharing and reuse of software solutions, knowledge, and expertise, and make digital commons them affordably accessible to everyone. In particular, the Next Generation Internet Commons (NGI) program was designed to foster collaboration on digital commons across all Eurozone countries, mapping past policy initiatives that have supported digital commons, and securing long-term funding for more than 700 digital commons projects. Other programs, such as the EU-FOSSA 2 initiative (Free and Open Source Software Auditing) launched in 2014, were designed to enhance the security and integrity of critical open-source software by establishing bug bounty programs, organizing hackathons and conferences, and engaging with developer communities. A similar initiative is the Common European Data Spaces, which aims to promote data sharing across various strategic sectors, including health, agriculture, manufacturing, energy, mobility, finance, public administration, and environmental sustainability, aligning with the objectives of the Green Deal. The goal is to establish a single market for data that fosters innovation and collaboration while adhering to EU rules and values, particularly in areas such as personal data protection, consumer rights, and competition law. This framework empowers data holders - businesses, public administrations, and individuals - to make their data available for reuse, either free of charge or for compensation. Finally, the EU also backs multi-country projects, such as the European Digital Infrastructure Consortium (EDIC), by providing a legal framework and targeted support. 
I believe that implementing digital commons projects and strategies at the EU level, rather than nationally, is more effective, as the EU can multiply its efforts on a supranational scale. Moreover, major global players such as the USA, China, and India are already advancing their own visions for digital commons strategies. Therefore, a unified European strategy is essential to maintain European competitiveness, sovereignty and digital independence on the world stage. Moreover, the EU must establish trusted, democratic and ethical guidelines for digital commons in alignment with the Declaration on Digital Rights and Principles, the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and the Digital Services Act (DSA). This should be accompanied by a clearly defined legal framework to ensure long-term viability, provide mechanisms for resolving conflicts over the use or management of digital commons, and safeguard privacy rights. The Digital Markets Act (DMA) is just an initial step in supporting digital commons, focusing mainly on regulating tech giants and ensuring fair competition, but it does not address broader issues like data sharing, open-source development, or collaborative digital infrastructure in great detail. A unified EU governance framework for digital commons with clearly defined rules must therefore be implemented. 
Although I think that launching digital commons projects on a global scale offers significant advantages, such as enhanced knowledge sharing and cost reduction, international strategies like the UNs’ Digital Public Goods Alliance have the capacity to cause difficulties. First, states operate under fundamentally different technical, regulatory, data privacy laws and ethical standards which makes collaboration more difficult. Second, many regions worldwide, including Sub-Saharan Africa, parts of Latin and South America, and Asia, continue to struggle with inadequate digital infrastructure, skills, and reliable internet access, hindering their ability to leverage digital commons and potentially exacerbating the digital divide (The World Bank, 2023. Development cooperation can be instrumental in closing the digital divide by shaping targeted investment strategies, fostering partnerships between local and global actors, and building capacity for local users in underserved regions.
Despite numerous policies, in my opinion, much more needs to be done to adequately support the preservation and further development of digital commons. For example, since the funding of digital commons presents a major challenge, a way should be found to attract private investors, alongside public ones such as states or the EU. Major digital companies like Apple, Google, and Microsoft have already heavily invested in the development of digital commons, recognizing their immense potential. However, it is important to note that these investments are driven primarily by hegemonic market interests and self-driven innovation interests rather than altruism. Therefore, I think that the involvement of the private sector could most effectively be achieved through public-private partnerships as they combine resources, knowledge, and expertise from both sectors. This would advance the development of digital commons while ensuring standardization in their creation from which citizens can benefit through a unified user-friendly interface.
